Add R112 blog post (#1051)
snowplow/snowplowanalytics.com: _posts/2019-02-06-snowplow-r112-baalbek-batch-pipeline-reliability-improvements/index.md

---
layout: post
title-short: Snowplow R112 batch pipeline reliability improvements
title: "Snowplow R112 Baalbek batch pipeline reliability improvements"
tags: [snowplow, batch]
author: Ben
category: Releases
permalink: /blog/2019/02/06/snowplow-r112-baalbek-batch-pipeline-reliability-improvements/
---

[Snowplow 112 Baalbek][snowplow-release], named after
[the city in Eastern Lebanon][baalbek], is a release focusing on reliability improvements for the
batch pipeline.

Please read on after the fold for:

1. [EmrEtlRunner improvements](#eer)
2. [Clojure Collector improvement](#cc)
3. [Redshift (and Postgres) data model improvement](#redshift)
4. [Upgrading](#upgrading)
5. [Roadmap](#roadmap)
6. [Help](#help)

![baalbek][baalbek-img]
<br>
BlingBling10 at the English Wikipedia [CC BY-SA 3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)

<!--more-->

<h2 id="eer">1. EmrEtlRunner improvements</h2>

> This release centers around EmrEtlRunner by adding new features whilst trying to make it more robust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release is focused on improving the EmrEtlRunner by adding new features and to make it more robust
```

with respect to AWS services at the same time.

<h3 id="persistent">1.1 Support for persistent EMR clusters</h3>

> EmrEtlRunner is now able to run steps on a long-running cluster saving up and down time through a

Reviewer: Does up and down time mean the time it takes to spin up and tear down the resource?

Author: yes

Reviewer 2: Would it be worth flagging that this opens up drip-feeding (i.e why I contributed that feature) and that it can yield sub 10 minute load times when used in combination with stream enrich mode?

Author: yup, I'm trying to be less verbose in blog post but that's definitely worth calling out.

`--use-persistent-jobflow` argument. Additionally it’s possible to specify the time-to-live of this
long-running cluster before spinning up a new one through `--persistent-jobflow-duration`.

<h3 id="timeouts">1.2 Recovery from EMR timeouts and S3 internal errors</h3>

> In the recent months, we’ve seen a worsening EMR service with more and more timeouts, with this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In recent months we’ve observed an increase in reliability issues with the Amazon EMR service with more and more timeouts. With this
```

release we’re aiming to tackle this issue by retrying in case of timeouts using an exponential
backoff. We’re adopting the same strategy regarding S3 internal errors.

<h3 id="compaction">1.3 Compaction steps for the different jobs' output</h3>

Some users have been hitting S3 rate limits because of too many small files being written at the
same time. This is the result of making heavy use of contexts while having large volume of data. For
example, a user using 50 different contexts with a shred job running concurrently on 20 Spark
executors will result in 1000, often very small, files being written concurrently. This is just for
the Snowplow pipeline and excludes any kind of processing that could happen on your end.

> To solve this issue, this release will consolidate (or combine) those small files into bigger ones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve this issue, this release will consolidate those small files into bigger ones
```
Same thing?

> during their transfer from HDFS to S3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
during their transfer from HDFS to S3. This will result in less writes and should mean fewer contention issues.
```

<h3 id="rename">1.4 Renaming of the EMR steps</h3>

We've taken advantage of this release to also rename the EMR steps and remove some of the clutter
accumulated over the years.

<h2 id="cc">2. Clojure Collector improvement</h2>

> We’ve increased the number of files that can be opened concurrently on the Elastic Beanstalk machines running the Clojure Collector from 1024 to 65536.

Reviewer: What problem does this solve, Ben?

<h2 id="redshift">3. Redshift (and Postgres) data model improvement</h2>

The `geo_region` column has been bumped to 3 characters in order to accomodate for a change in the
underlying library the IP lookups enrichment used to fill this column.

Thanks to [Mike][miike] from [Snowflake Analytics][sa] for this open source contribution.

<h2 id="upgrading">4. Upgrading</h2>

<h3 id="upg-eer">4.1 Upgrading EmrEtlRunner</h3>

The latest version of the *EmrEtlRunner* is available from our Bintray
[here](http://dl.bintray.com/snowplow/snowplow-generic/snowplow_emr_r112_baalbek.zip).

> A settings is needed to enable or disable compaction of the output of the shred job discussed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A setting is needed to enable or disable compaction of the output of the shred job discussed above.
```
?

{% highlight yaml %}
aws:
  s3:
    consolidate_shredded_output: false
{% endhighlight %}

For a complete example, see our sample [`config.yml`](https://github.com/snowplow/snowplow/blob/r112-baalbek/3-enrich/emr-etl-runner/config/config.yml.sample) template.

<h3 id="upg-cc">4.2 Upgrading the Clojure Collector</h3>

> The new Clojure Collector incorporating the improvement discussed above is available in S3 at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new Clojure Collector is available in S3 at:
```
Not sure we need the extra bit.

{% highlight yaml %}
s3://snowplow-hosted-assets/2-collectors/clojure-collector/clojure-collector-2.1.3-standalone.war
{% endhighlight %}

<h3 id="upg-model">4.3 Upgrading the events table definition</h3>

We've put together migration scripts which are available on GitHub:

- for Redshift: [migrate_0.10.0_to_0.11.0.sql](https://github.com/snowplow/snowplow/blob/master/4-storage/redshift-storage/sql/migrate_0.10.0_to_0.11.0.sql)
- for Postgres: [migrate_0.7.0_to_0.7.1.sql](https://github.com/snowplow/snowplow/blob/master/4-storage/postgres-storage/sql/migrate_0.7.0_to_0.7.1.0.sql)

<h2 id="roadmap">5. Roadmap</h2>

Upcoming Snowplow releases include:

* [R113 [RT] Real-time maintenance][r113-rt], a release focusing on the real-time pipeline with

> plentiy of community contributions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plenty of community contributions
```
